Now when Rachel saw that she bore Jacob
no children, Rachel envied her sister
and said to Jacob, "Give me children, or
else I die." And Jacob's anger was
aroused against Rachel, "Am I in the
place of God who has withheld from you
the fruit of the womb? Here's
my maid, Belha.
Go into her, and she will bear a child
on my knees, that I also may have
children by her." Then she gave him
Bilha, her maid, as wife, and Jacob went
into her. And Bilha conceived and bore
Jacob a son.
Then Rachel said, "God has judged my
case, and he has also heard my voice and
given me a son."
Therefore, she called his name Dan.
And Rachel's made Bilha conceived again,
and bore Jacob a second son. Then Rachel
said, "With great wrestlings I have
wrestled with my sister, and indeed I
have prevailed."
So she called his name Naphali.
When Leah saw that she had stopped
bearing, she took Zilpa, her maid, and
gave her to Jacob as wife. And Leah's
maid, Zilpa, bore Jacob a son. Then Leah
said, "A troop comes." So she called his
name Gad, and Leah's maid, Zilpa, bore
Jacob a second son. I am happy for the
daughters will call me blessed. So she
called his name Asher.
Now Reuben went in the days of wheat
harvest and found mandrekes in the field
and brought them to his mother Leah.
Then Rachel said to Leah, "Please give
me some of your son's mandrekes."
Is it a small matter that you have taken
away my husband? Would you take away my
son's mandrekes also? Therefore, he will
lie with you tonight for your son's
mandrekes.
When Jacob came out of the field in the
evening, Leah went out to meet him. You
must come into me, for I have surely
hired you with my son's mandrekes.
And he lay with her that night.
And God listened to Leah, and she
conceived and bore Jacob a fifth son.
God has given me my wages because I have
given my maid to my husband.
So she called his name Issacha.
Then Leah conceived again and bore Jacob
a sixth son.
God has endowed me with a good
endowment. Now my husband will dwell
with me because I have borne him six
sons. So she called his name Zebulun.
Afterward she bore a daughter and called
her name Dina.
Then God remembered Rachel and God
listened to her and opened her womb and
she conceived and bore a son.
God has taken away my reproach. So she
called his name Joseph.
The Lord shall add to me another son.
And it came to pass when Rachel had born
Joseph that Jacob said to Laban,
"Send me away that I may go to my own
place and to my country. Give me my
wives and my children for whom I have
served you, and let me go, for you know
my service, which I have done for you.
Please stay if I have found favor in
your eyes. For I have learned by
experience that the Lord has blessed me
for your sake. Name me your wages and I
will give it.
You know how I have served you and how
your livestock has been with me. For
what you had before I came was little,
and it has increased to a great amount.
The Lord has blessed you since my
coming. And now, when shall I also
provide for my own house? What shall I
give you? You shall not give me
anything. If you will do this thing for
me, I will again feed and keep your
flocks. Let me pass through all your
flock today, removing from there all the
speckled and spotted sheep, and all the
brown ones among the lambs, and the
spotted and speckled among the goats,
and these shall be my wages. So my
righteousness will answer for me in time
to come when the subject of my wages
comes before you. Everyone that is not
speckled and spotted among the goats and
brown among the lambs will be considered
stolen if it is with me.
Oh that it were according to your word.
So he removed that day the male goats
that were speckled and spotted. All the
female goats that were speckled and
spotted. every one that had some white
in it and all the brown ones among the
lambs and gave them into the hand of his
sons.
[Music]
Then he put three days journey between
himself and Jacob. And Jacob fed the
rest of Laban's flocks.
Now Jacob took for himself rods of green
popppler and of the almond and chestnut
trees,
peeled white strips in them, and exposed
the white which was in the rods.
And the rods which he had peeled, he set
before the flocks in the gutters, in the
watering troughs where the flocks came
to drink, so that they should conceive
when they came to drink.
So the flocks conceived before the rods,
and the flocks brought forth stre,
speckled, and spotted.
Then Jacob separated the lambs, and made
the flocks face toward the stre and all
the brown in the flock of Laban.
But he put his own flocks by themselves,
and did not put them with Laban's flock.
And it came to pass whenever the
stronger livestock conceived that Jacob
placed the rods before the eyes of the
livestock in the gutters that they might
conceive among the rods.
But when the flocks were feeble, he did
not put them in. So the feebler were
Labens and the stronger Jacobs.
Thus the man became exceedingly
prosperous and had large flocks, female
and male servants, and camels and
donkeys.